PEP 606: Shared background for PEP 602 and PEP 605 (#5)
ncoghlan/peps: pep-0606.rst

The easiest way to simplify those investigations and reduce the likelihood of
users encountering problems is to reduce the size of the batches being shipped.

PEP 602 proposes to address this problem via the straightforward approach of 
reducing CPython's typical batch size by 50%, shipping 12 months of changes
each time, rather than accumulating 18+ months of changes.

PEP 605 proposes to address it by regularly delivering 2 months worth of changes
to a subset of Python's user base that opts in to running a rolling stream of
beta releases (similar to running Windows Insider builds instead of the Windows
retail release, or running Debian testing instead of Debian stable).

Reducing the latency of feature delivery
----------------------------------------

When only stable releases are seeing significant user adoption, and there's a
long period of time between stable releases, it creates an incredibly strong
temptation for developers to push changes into stable releases before they're
really ready for general use.

PEP 602 proposes to address this problem by reducing the period of time
between stable releases to 12 months rather than 18 months.

> PEP 605 proposes to address it by actively seeking to create a community of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PEP 605 proposes to address it by actively creating a community of
```

alignment with events like PyCon US (typically April/May) and the now-annual
core development sprints (typically in September).

PEP 602 proposes to address this problem by publishing a new release in October
every year, and basing the pre-release calendar for each year off that.

PEP 605 proposes to address this problem by alternating between release years
(where a new stable release is published in August), and non-release years
(where only maintenance releases and new rolling beta releases are published).

Improving the pre-release design feedback cycle
-----------------------------------------------

One of the challenges of designing changes to the core interpreter and standard
library APIs is that the user base in a position to provide feedback on
nightly builds and the current pre-releases is relatively limited. This means
that much user feedback isn't received until after an API design has already
shipped in a full X.Y.0 release.

If the API is a regular API, then deprecation cycles mean that it may take
literally years to correct any design mistakes identified at that point.
Marking APIs as provisional offers a way to avoid that constraint, but actually

> taking advantage of that freedom causes other problems.

Reviewer: Guido also stated that we won't do provisional APIs anymore, after the typing and asyncio experience.

I haven't heard of the SC rescinding that yet, and obviously a change to release process would justify revisiting that decision, but I think it's fine to say here that our current position is to not treat APIs as provisional.

Author: Is that something he said in person at the core dev sprints? I don't recall anyone writing that down anywhere.

Author: I implied this a bit more heavily by putting a "nominally" in the sentence.

Reviewer: I think it was actually sprints two years ago? But yeah, nobody wrote it down...

The faster 12-month full release cadence in PEP 602 means that users in this
category may end up skipping two releases where they would previously have only
skipped one. However, the extended notice period for deprecations means that
skipping a single release should no longer result in missed deprecation warnings.

With a 12-month release cadence each release branch will spend proportionally
more time in security-fix-only mode (~48 months out of ~60 vs the current ~42
out of ~60).

The slower 24-month full release cadence in PEP 605 may move some of the users
that have historically been in this category into the "update to every stable
release" category.

With a 24-month release cadence each release branch will spend proportionally
less time in security-fix-only mode (~36 months out of ~60 vs the current ~42
out of ~60).

Impact on users and redistributors that update to every release
---------------------------------------------------------------

Many of Python's users never install a pre-release, but do update to every
stable release series at some point after it is published.

PEP 602 aims to mitigate the potential negative impact on members of this group

> by keeping the minimum gap between releases to 12 months.

Reviewer: @ambv should tweak this to sell PEP 602 a little better :)

Author: This is one of the paragraphs I amended after you reminded me that PEP 602 had been updated to retain the 18 month support period.

PEP 605 aims to mitigates the potential negative impact on members of this group

> by focusing its change proposals on the management of the pre-release period.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
by increasing use during the pre-release period to achieve more stable final releases.
```

However, some users of the stable releases are likely to be unhappy with the
slower release cadence in that PEP, while also being unwilling to make the jump

> to using the rolling beta release stream.

Reviewer: These are not really necessary in this doc.

Author: Removed

Full discussion of the impact on this group is left to the individual PEPs.

Impact on users and redistributors of CPython nightly builds
------------------------------------------------------------

Despite the difficulties of doing so, there are already some users and
redistributors that take on the challenge of using or publishing the CPython
master branch directly.

Neither PEP 602 nor PEP 605 should directly affect this group, but the rolling

> release stream proposal in PEP 605 aims to substantially reduce the barriers to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
release stream proposal in PEP 605 aims to reduce barriers to
```

(I do think PEP 605 is actually substantially reducing all barriers here, but that's a value statement which doesn't belong in this doc.)

more users adopting this style of usage (except with the rolling beta stream,
rather than using the master branch directly).

Impact on maintainers of third party libraries
----------------------------------------------

For maintainers of third party libraries, the key source of support complexity
is the *number* of different Python versions in widespread use.

PEP 602 aims to mitigate the potential negative impact on members of this group
by keeping the minimum gap between full releases to 12 months.

PEP 605 aims to mitigate the potential negative impact on members of this group

> by increasing the gap between full releases to 24 months, and retaining the

Reviewer: "... and reducing the number of simultaneous actively maintained full releases at any time to one ..."

Author: Oh, there's  a text change in https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0602/#one-year-of-full-support-four-more-years-of-security-fixes that hasn't been reflected in the header yet (the support period went back up to 18 months)

Author: Fixed a few parts of PEP 606 that were incorrectly based on the title of that section, rather than the amended text of the bullet points.

core development sprints (typically in September).

PEP 602 proposes to address this problem by publishing a new release in October
every year, and basing the pre-release calendar for each year off that.

PEP 605 proposes to address this problem by alternating between release years
(where a new stable release is published in August), and non-release years
(where only maintenance releases and new rolling beta releases are published).

Improving the pre-release design feedback cycle
-----------------------------------------------

One of the challenges of designing changes to the core interpreter and standard
library APIs is that the user base in a position to provide feedback on
nightly builds and the current pre-releases is relatively limited. This means
that much user feedback isn't received until after an API design has already
shipped in a full X.Y.0 release.

If the API is a regular API, then deprecation cycles mean that it may take
literally years to correct any design mistakes identified at that point.
Marking APIs as provisional nominally offers a way to avoid that constraint,
but actually taking advantage of that freedom causes other problems.

> PEP 602 doesn't attempt to address this problem.

Reviewer 2: There's a change compared to the status quo: an increase to seven versioned alpha releases because it makes it easier to tell with versioned -dev packages on CI whether a problem exists or was fixed already; or whether a feature is available yet or not.

Author: Added
